***************************
  Discussing Manipulation
***************************

.. blogentry::
   :date: 2012-07-17
   :author: cce

Thus far HTSQL has been limited to querying data.  In the
next few months we'd like to expand the scope to permit both
record and set-based data manipulations.  This is a
discussion of our ideas and how we might accomplish it.

.. blogcut::

Background
==========

There are three reasons for adding mutation operations to
HTSQL.  The first one is to enable two-tier applications
using HTSQL as a middleware layer.  This requires a set of
single record, CRUD, operations.  The second reason is to
enable database level transformations, including set based
updates, select-from/insert-into and deletes.  The third is
to provide some way to import data into the database system.

The ideal solution is one that is not just comprehensive, but
also consistent with the rest of HTSQL.  The operators we
choose, while they need to be implementable using modern
relational databases, don't need to have SQL equivalents.
Conversely, while it might be fun for a URL inspired syntax
to be "RESTful", it isn't strictly speaking a requirement.
HTSQL is its own language with its own inherent logic,
what's important is that the solution solve real problems in
a manner consistent with its own internal design.

Historical
==========

Earlier versions of HTSQL had ``insert()``, ``update()``, and
``delete()`` commands which supplemented the default
``select()`` command.  These commands provided an alternative
translation of the query syntax into SQL.  Insert was limited
to a single record.  Update used ``:=`` operator for
assignment, unwisely mixing filter criteria and assignments.

We also had a ``merge()`` command, which was very popular 
since it was idempotent.  This was a record-based command
that first did an update, and if that returned zero records,
it would do an insert instead. 

One of the biggest usability problems with our update and
delete operations was that they required imagination as to
what would happen when you ran the query.  Would your query
delete one record, or every row from the table?  As a safety,
we added an ``expect=n`` command argument which would
rollback the update if the number of affected records
differed from expectation.  Since the default value was
``1``, this approach saved countless accidental deletes.
However, it felt more of a bandaid than a solution.

A secondary problem is that we ended up having to introduce a
redundant ``import()`` command that was essentially a variant
of insert/update/merge that took an external data set and
applied it row-by-row.  The primary mechanism for altering
data sets was to download the data, change what would be
required, and then merge the results using import.  The
``import()`` command did also have a way to signal deleted
records, but it was hardly used.

One of the features that these commands supported was the
convenient manipulation of "facet" tables.  A facet table is
one where there is a zero-or-one relationship to the current
driving table.  The assignment operator supported assignments
to facet tables, confusing the interpretation of ``update()``
since an assignment to a facet that didn't exist was
implemented using an ``INSERT``.  It would be very nice to
keep this convenience, although with better clarity as to
what each command does.

We also had a ``do()`` command which wrapped N sub commands
into a single transaction.  Using this mechanism a client
application could insert/update an entire hierarchy.

HTSQL 2.X must have some way to address the business needs
that drove these historical features, even if the new
solution doesn't take the same form.


