***************************
  Improved Visual Display
***************************

.. blogentry::
   :date: 2012-03-19
   :author: cce

We overhauled the visual style of HTML-based output.  The
web-based editor and the `/:html` output now share the same
formatting theme.  This theme includes row numbers and visual
hints for missing records and empty strings.

.. blogcut::

Background
----------

While the primary focus of HTSQL is on the query language
itself, it is important to have visual output that permits
HTSQL to be used out-of-the-box for ad-hoc queries.  This
update improves our HTML-based output to make data
exploration easier.

Specifically, we improved the ``/:html`` output, the 
default output format for browsers.   Additionally, we
updated the visual query editor ``/:shell``.  To use the
shell plugin, you must enable it with ``-E tweak.shell`` or
include it in your configuration file.


Presentation
------------

In HTML-based formats, row numbers are now shown; they are
displayed in grey lettering with a slightly reduced font
size.  Numeric columns are right-aligned.  For boolean
columns, we show *false* in italic so that it is more easily
distinguished from ``true``.

.. htsql:: 
   :hide:

   /department{name, num_course := count(course), 
               num_course > avg(fork().num_course)
               :as 'greater than average?'}


It is was previously impossible to know when a nested record
was missing or when the record existed but its selected
columns were ``null``.  We now indicate missing records using
dashes between fields:

.. htsql:: /department{name, school{name,campus}}
   :hide:

By convention, we show ``null`` as an empty cell.  This makes
sense for numeric, boolean, date and other types.   However,
it was impossible to distinguish ``null`` from an empty
string (``''``).  Since this difference can be a source of
errors, we now show an empty string as a dotted box.

.. htsql:: 
   :hide:

   /course{department_code, no, description,
           description :is_null, description == ''} ?!description

